src/test/spec/json/auth/mongodb-oidc.md, before:

# MongoDB OIDC

## Local Testing

See the detailed instructions in
[drivers-evergreen-tools](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/README.md)
for how to set up your environment for OIDC testing.

______________________________________________________________________

## Unified Spec Tests

Drivers MUST run the unified spec tests in all supported OIDC environments. Drivers MUST set the placeholder
authMechanism properties (`ENVIRONMENT` and `TOKEN_RESOURCE`, if applicable). These will typically be read from
environment variables set by the test runner, e,g. `AZUREOIDC_RESOURCE`.

______________________________________________________________________

## Machine Authentication Flow Prose Tests

Drivers MUST run the machine prose tests when `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` is set. Drivers can either set the `ENVIRONMENT:test`
auth mechanism property, or use a custom callback that also reads the file.

Drivers can also choose to run the machine prose tests on GCP or Azure VMs, or on the Kubernetes clusters.

Drivers MUST implement all prose tests in this section. Unless otherwise noted, all `MongoClient` instances MUST be
configured with `retryReads=false`.

> [!NOTE]
> For test cases that create fail points, drivers MUST either use a unique `appName` or explicitly remove the fail point
> callback to prevent interaction between test cases.

After setting up your OIDC
[environment](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/README.md),
source the `secrets-export.sh` file and use the associated env variables in your tests.

### Callback Authentication

**1.1 Callback is called during authentication**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**1.2 Callback is called once for multiple connections**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Start 10 threads and run 100 `find` operations in each thread that all succeed.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

### (2) OIDC Callback Validation

**2.1 Valid Callback Inputs**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that validates its inputs and returns a valid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the OIDC callback was called with the appropriate inputs, including the timeout parameter if possible.
- Close the client.

**2.2 OIDC Callback Returns Null**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that returns `null`.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.3 OIDC Callback Returns Missing Data**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that returns data not conforming to the `OIDCCredential` with
    missing fields.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.4 Invalid Client Configuration with Callback**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback and auth mechanism property `ENVIRONMENT:test`.
- Assert it returns a client configuration error upon client creation, or client connect if your driver validates on
    connection.

**2.5 Invalid use of ALLOWED_HOSTS**

- Create an OIDC configured client with auth mechanism properties `{"ENVIRONMENT": "azure", "ALLOWED_HOSTS": []}`.
- Assert it returns a client configuration error upon client creation, or client connect if your driver validates on
    connection.

### (3) Authentication Failure

**3.1 Authentication failure with cached tokens fetch a new token and retry auth**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Poison the *Client Cache* with an invalid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**3.2 Authentication failures without cached tokens return an error**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that always returns invalid access tokens.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**3.3 Unexpected error code does not clear the cache**

- Create a `MongoClient` with an OIDC callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 20 // IllegalOperation
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback has been called once.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback has been called once.
- Close the client.

### (4) Reauthentication

#### 4.1 Reauthentication Succeeds

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times (once during the connection handshake, and again during reauthentication).
- Close the client.

#### 4.2 Read Commands Fail If Reauthentication Fails

- Create a `MongoClient` whose OIDC callback returns one good token and then bad tokens after the first call.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times.
- Close the client.

#### 4.3 Write Commands Fail If Reauthentication Fails

- Create a `MongoClient` whose OIDC callback returns one good token and then bad tokens after the first call.
- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `insert` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "insert"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times.
- Close the client.

#### 4.4 Speculative Authentication should be ignored on Reauthentication

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Populate the *Client Cache* with a valid access token to enforce Speculative Authentication.
- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was not called.
- Assert there were no `SaslStart` commands executed.
- Set a fail point for `insert` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "insert"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called once.
- Assert there were `SaslStart` commands executed.
- Close the client.

## (5) Azure Tests

Drivers MUST only run the Azure tests when testing on an Azure VM. See instructions in
[Drivers Evergreen Tools](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/azure/README.md)
for test setup.

# 5.1 Azure With No Username

- Create an OIDC configured client with `ENVIRONMENT:azure` and a valid `TOKEN_RESOURCE` and no username.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

# 5.2 Azure with Bad Username

- Create an OIDC configured client with `ENVIRONMENT:azure` and a valid `TOKEN_RESOURCE` and a username of `"bad"`.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

______________________________________________________________________

## Human Authentication Flow Prose Tests

Drivers that support the [Human Authentication Flow](../auth.md#human-authentication-flow) MUST implement all prose
tests in this section. Unless otherwise noted, all `MongoClient` instances MUST be configured with `retryReads=false`.

The human workflow tests MUST only be run when `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` is set.

> [!NOTE]
> For test cases that create fail points, drivers MUST either use a unique `appName` or explicitly remove the fail point
> after the test to prevent interaction between test cases.

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate against a server configured with either one or two configured identity providers.

Unless otherwise specified, use `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and the `test_user1` token in the `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` as the
"access_token", and a dummy "refresh_token" for all tests.

When using an explicit username for the client, we use the token name and the domain name given by `OIDC_DOMAIN`, e.g.
`test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.

### (1) OIDC Human Callback Authentication

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate using OIDC callback(s) when there is one principal configured.

**1.1 Single Principal Implicit Username**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.2 Single Principal Explicit Username**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and a username of `test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.3 Multiple Principal User 1**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and username of `test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.4 Multiple Principal User 2**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and username of `test_user2@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`. that reads the
    `test_user2` token file.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.5 Multiple Principal No User**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and no username.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails.
- Close the client.

**1.6 Allowed Hosts Blocked**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an `ALLOWED_HOSTS` that is an empty list.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.
- Create a client that uses the URL `mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&ignored=example.com`, a human
    callback, and an `ALLOWED_HOSTS` that contains `["example.com"]`.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.

**1.7 Allowed Hosts in Connection String Ignored**

- Create an OIDC configured client with the connection string:
    `mongodb+srv://example.com/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=ALLOWED_HOSTS:%5B%22example.com%22%5D`
    and a Human Callback.
- Assert that the creation of the client raises a configuration error.

**1.8 Machine IdP with Human Callback**

This test MUST only be run when `OIDC_IS_LOCAL` is set. This indicates that the server is local and not using Atlas. In
this case, `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` will be configured with a human user `test_user1`, and a machine user `test_machine`.
This test uses the machine user with a human callback, ensuring that the missing `clientId` in the
`PrincipalStepRequest` response is handled by the driver.

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and a username of `test_machine` that uses the
    `test_machine` token.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

### (2) OIDC Human Callback Validation

**2.1 Valid Callback Inputs**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that validates its inputs and returns a valid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds. Verify that the human callback was called with the appropriate inputs,
    including the timeout parameter if possible.
- Close the client.

**2.2 Human Callback Returns Missing Data**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns data not conforming to the `OIDCCredential` with
    missing fields.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.3 Refresh Token Is Passed To The Callback**

- Create a `MongoClient` with a human callback that checks for the presence of a refresh token.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback has been called twice.
- Assert that the refresh token was provided to the callback once.

### (3) Speculative Authentication

**3.1 Uses speculative authentication if there is a cached token**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    closeConnection: true
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 18
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**3.2 Does not use speculative authentication if there is no cached token**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 18
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

### (4) Reauthentication

**4.1 Succeeds**

- Create an OIDC configured client and add an event listener. The following assumes that the driver does not emit
    `saslStart` or `saslContinue` events. If the driver does emit those events, ignore/filter them for the purposes of
    this test.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Clear the listener state if possible.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform another find operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called twice.
- Assert that the ordering of list started events is \[`find`\], , `find`. Note that if the listener stat could not be
    cleared then there will and be extra `find` command.
- Assert that the list of command succeeded events is \[`find`\].
- Assert that a `find` operation failed once during the command execution.
- Close the client.

**4.2 Succeeds no refresh**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that does not return a refresh token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called twice.
- Close the client.

**4.3 Succeeds after refresh fails**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a callback that returns the `test_user1` access token and a bad refresh token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find",
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called 2 times.
- Close the client.

**4.4 Fails**

- Create an OIDC configured client that returns invalid refresh tokens and returns invalid access tokens after the first
    access.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds (to force a speculative auth).
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a failCommand of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find",
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a find operation that fails.
- Assert that the human callback has been called three times.
- Close the client.

Commit message:

RUST-2226 Add a prose test for OIDC reauthentication when a session is involved (#1484)

src/test/spec/json/auth/mongodb-oidc.md, after:

# MongoDB OIDC

## Local Testing

See the detailed instructions in
[drivers-evergreen-tools](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/README.md)
for how to set up your environment for OIDC testing.

______________________________________________________________________

## Unified Spec Tests

Drivers MUST run the unified spec tests in all supported OIDC environments. Drivers MUST set the placeholder
authMechanism properties (`ENVIRONMENT` and `TOKEN_RESOURCE`, if applicable). These will typically be read from
environment variables set by the test runner, e,g. `AZUREOIDC_RESOURCE`.

______________________________________________________________________

## Machine Authentication Flow Prose Tests

Drivers MUST run the machine prose tests when `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` is set. Drivers can either set the `ENVIRONMENT:test`
auth mechanism property, or use a custom callback that also reads the file.

Drivers can also choose to run the machine prose tests on GCP or Azure VMs, or on the Kubernetes clusters.

Drivers MUST implement all prose tests in this section. Unless otherwise noted, all `MongoClient` instances MUST be
configured with `retryReads=false`.

> [!NOTE]
> For test cases that create fail points, drivers MUST either use a unique `appName` or explicitly remove the fail point
> callback to prevent interaction between test cases.

After setting up your OIDC
[environment](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/README.md),
source the `secrets-export.sh` file and use the associated env variables in your tests.

### Callback Authentication

**1.1 Callback is called during authentication**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**1.2 Callback is called once for multiple connections**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Start 10 threads and run 100 `find` operations in each thread that all succeed.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

### (2) OIDC Callback Validation

**2.1 Valid Callback Inputs**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that validates its inputs and returns a valid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the OIDC callback was called with the appropriate inputs, including the timeout parameter if possible.
- Close the client.

**2.2 OIDC Callback Returns Null**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that returns `null`.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.3 OIDC Callback Returns Missing Data**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that returns data not conforming to the `OIDCCredential` with
    missing fields.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.4 Invalid Client Configuration with Callback**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback and auth mechanism property `ENVIRONMENT:test`.
- Assert it returns a client configuration error upon client creation, or client connect if your driver validates on
    connection.

**2.5 Invalid use of ALLOWED_HOSTS**

- Create an OIDC configured client with auth mechanism properties `{"ENVIRONMENT": "azure", "ALLOWED_HOSTS": []}`.
- Assert it returns a client configuration error upon client creation, or client connect if your driver validates on
    connection.

### (3) Authentication Failure

**3.1 Authentication failure with cached tokens fetch a new token and retry auth**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Poison the *Client Cache* with an invalid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**3.2 Authentication failures without cached tokens return an error**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an OIDC callback that always returns invalid access tokens.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 1 time.
- Close the client.

**3.3 Unexpected error code does not clear the cache**

- Create a `MongoClient` with an OIDC callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 20 // IllegalOperation
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback has been called once.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback has been called once.
- Close the client.

### (4) Reauthentication

#### 4.1 Reauthentication Succeeds

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times (once during the connection handshake, and again during reauthentication).
- Close the client.

#### 4.2 Read Commands Fail If Reauthentication Fails

- Create a `MongoClient` whose OIDC callback returns one good token and then bad tokens after the first call.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times.
- Close the client.

#### 4.3 Write Commands Fail If Reauthentication Fails

- Create a `MongoClient` whose OIDC callback returns one good token and then bad tokens after the first call.
- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `insert` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "insert"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times.
- Close the client.

#### 4.4 Speculative Authentication should be ignored on Reauthentication

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Populate the *Client Cache* with a valid access token to enforce Speculative Authentication.
- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was not called.
- Assert there were no `SaslStart` commands executed.
- Set a fail point for `insert` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "insert"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform an `insert` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called once.
- Assert there were `SaslStart` commands executed.
- Close the client.

#### 4.5 Reauthentication Succeeds when a Session is involved

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Start a new session.
- In the started session perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback was called 2 times (once during the connection handshake, and again during reauthentication).
- Close the session and the client.

## (5) Azure Tests

Drivers MUST only run the Azure tests when testing on an Azure VM. See instructions in
[Drivers Evergreen Tools](https://github.com/mongodb-labs/drivers-evergreen-tools/blob/master/.evergreen/auth_oidc/azure/README.md)
for test setup.

# 5.1 Azure With No Username

- Create an OIDC configured client with `ENVIRONMENT:azure` and a valid `TOKEN_RESOURCE` and no username.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

# 5.2 Azure with Bad Username

- Create an OIDC configured client with `ENVIRONMENT:azure` and a valid `TOKEN_RESOURCE` and a username of `"bad"`.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

______________________________________________________________________

## Human Authentication Flow Prose Tests

Drivers that support the [Human Authentication Flow](../auth.md#human-authentication-flow) MUST implement all prose
tests in this section. Unless otherwise noted, all `MongoClient` instances MUST be configured with `retryReads=false`.

The human workflow tests MUST only be run when `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` is set.

> [!NOTE]
> For test cases that create fail points, drivers MUST either use a unique `appName` or explicitly remove the fail point
> after the test to prevent interaction between test cases.

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate against a server configured with either one or two configured identity providers.

Unless otherwise specified, use `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and the `test_user1` token in the `OIDC_TOKEN_DIR` as the
"access_token", and a dummy "refresh_token" for all tests.

When using an explicit username for the client, we use the token name and the domain name given by `OIDC_DOMAIN`, e.g.
`test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.

### (1) OIDC Human Callback Authentication

Drivers MUST be able to authenticate using OIDC callback(s) when there is one principal configured.

**1.1 Single Principal Implicit Username**

- Create an OIDC configured client.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.2 Single Principal Explicit Username**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and a username of `test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.3 Multiple Principal User 1**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and username of `test_user1@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.4 Multiple Principal User 2**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and username of `test_user2@${OIDC_DOMAIN}`. that reads the
    `test_user2` token file.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**1.5 Multiple Principal No User**

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_MULTI` and no username.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails.
- Close the client.

**1.6 Allowed Hosts Blocked**

- Create an OIDC configured client with an `ALLOWED_HOSTS` that is an empty list.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.
- Create a client that uses the URL `mongodb://localhost/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&ignored=example.com`, a human
    callback, and an `ALLOWED_HOSTS` that contains `["example.com"]`.
- Assert that a `find` operation fails with a client-side error.
- Close the client.

**1.7 Allowed Hosts in Connection String Ignored**

- Create an OIDC configured client with the connection string:
    `mongodb+srv://example.com/?authMechanism=MONGODB-OIDC&authMechanismProperties=ALLOWED_HOSTS:%5B%22example.com%22%5D`
    and a Human Callback.
- Assert that the creation of the client raises a configuration error.

**1.8 Machine IdP with Human Callback**

This test MUST only be run when `OIDC_IS_LOCAL` is set. This indicates that the server is local and not using Atlas. In
this case, `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` will be configured with a human user `test_user1`, and a machine user `test_machine`.
This test uses the machine user with a human callback, ensuring that the missing `clientId` in the
`PrincipalStepRequest` response is handled by the driver.

- Create an OIDC configured client with `MONGODB_URI_SINGLE` and a username of `test_machine` that uses the
    `test_machine` token.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

### (2) OIDC Human Callback Validation

**2.1 Valid Callback Inputs**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that validates its inputs and returns a valid access token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds. Verify that the human callback was called with the appropriate inputs,
    including the timeout parameter if possible.
- Close the client.

**2.2 Human Callback Returns Missing Data**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns data not conforming to the `OIDCCredential` with
    missing fields.
- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

**2.3 Refresh Token Is Passed To The Callback**

- Create a `MongoClient` with a human callback that checks for the presence of a refresh token.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the callback has been called twice.
- Assert that the refresh token was provided to the callback once.

### (3) Speculative Authentication

**3.1 Uses speculative authentication if there is a cached token**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `find` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    closeConnection: true
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 18
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Close the client.

**3.2 Does not use speculative authentication if there is no cached token**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that returns a valid token.
- Set a fail point for `saslStart` commands of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "saslStart"
    ],
    errorCode: 18
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that fails.
- Close the client.

### (4) Reauthentication

**4.1 Succeeds**

- Create an OIDC configured client and add an event listener. The following assumes that the driver does not emit
    `saslStart` or `saslContinue` events. If the driver does emit those events, ignore/filter them for the purposes of
    this test.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Clear the listener state if possible.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform another find operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called twice.
- Assert that the ordering of list started events is \[`find`\], , `find`. Note that if the listener stat could not be
    cleared then there will and be extra `find` command.
- Assert that the list of command succeeded events is \[`find`\].
- Assert that a `find` operation failed once during the command execution.
- Close the client.

**4.2 Succeeds no refresh**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a human callback that does not return a refresh token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find"
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called twice.
- Close the client.

**4.3 Succeeds after refresh fails**

- Create an OIDC configured client with a callback that returns the `test_user1` access token and a bad refresh token.
- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a fail point of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find",
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a `find` operation that succeeds.
- Assert that the human callback has been called 2 times.
- Close the client.

**4.4 Fails**

- Create an OIDC configured client that returns invalid refresh tokens and returns invalid access tokens after the first
    access.
- Perform a find operation that succeeds (to force a speculative auth).
- Assert that the human callback has been called once.
- Force a reauthenication using a failCommand of the form:

```javascript
{
  configureFailPoint: "failCommand",
  mode: {
    times: 1
  },
  data: {
    failCommands: [
      "find",
    ],
    errorCode: 391 // ReauthenticationRequired
  }
}
```

- Perform a find operation that fails.
- Assert that the human callback has been called three times.
- Close the client.
