spec/sessions/README.md, before:

# Driver Session Tests

______________________________________________________________________

## Introduction

The YAML and JSON files in this directory are platform-independent tests meant to exercise a driver's implementation of
sessions. These tests utilize the [Unified Test Format](../../unified-test-format/unified-test-format.md).

### Snapshot session tests

The default snapshot history window on the server is 5 minutes. Running the test in debug mode, or in any other slow
configuration may lead to `SnapshotTooOld` errors. Drivers can work around this issue by increasing the server's
`minSnapshotHistoryWindowInSeconds` parameter, for example:

```python
client.admin.command('setParameter', 1, minSnapshotHistoryWindowInSeconds=600)
```

### Testing against servers that do not support sessions

Since all regular 3.6+ servers support sessions, the prose tests which test for session non-support SHOULD use a
mongocryptd server as the test server (available with server versions 4.2+); however, if future versions of mongocryptd
support sessions or if mongocryptd is not a viable option for the driver implementing these tests, another server MAY be
substituted as long as it does not return a non-null value for `logicalSessionTimeoutMinutes`; in the event that no such
server is readily available, a mock server may be used as a last resort.

As part of the test setup for these cases, create a `MongoClient` pointed at the test server with the options specified
in the test case and verify that the test server does NOT define a value for `logicalSessionTimeoutMinutes` by sending a
hello command and checking the response.

## Prose tests

### 1. Setting both `snapshot` and `causalConsistency` to true is not allowed

Snapshot sessions tests require server of version 5.0 or higher and replica set or a sharded cluster deployment.

- `client.startSession(snapshot = true, causalConsistency = true)`
- Assert that an error was raised by driver

### 2. Pool is LIFO

This test applies to drivers with session pools.

- Call `MongoClient.startSession` twice to create two sessions, let us call them `A` and `B`.
- Call `A.endSession`, then `B.endSession`.
- Call `MongoClient.startSession`: the resulting session must have the same session ID as `B`.
- Call `MongoClient.startSession` again: the resulting session must have the same session ID as `A`.

### 3. `$clusterTime` in commands

- Register a command-started and a command-succeeded APM listener. If the driver has no APM support, inspect
    commands/replies in another idiomatic way, such as monkey-patching or a mock server.
- Send a `ping` command to the server with the generic `runCommand` method.
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener includes `$clusterTime` if and only if `maxWireVersion`
    > = 6.
- Record the `$clusterTime`, if any, in the reply passed to the command-succeeded APM listener.
- Send another `ping` command.
- Assert that `$clusterTime` in the command passed to the command-started listener, if any, equals the `$clusterTime` in
    the previous server reply.

Repeat the above for:

- An aggregate command from the `aggregate` helper method
- A find command from the `find` helper method
- An insert command from the `insert_one` helper method

### 4. Explicit and implicit session arguments

- Register a command-started APM listener. If the driver has no APM support, inspect commands in another idiomatic way,
    such as monkey-patching or a mock server.
- Create `client1`
- Get `database` from `client1`
- Get `collection` from `database`
- Start `session` from `client1`
- Call `collection.insertOne(session,...)`
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener contained the session `lsid` from `session`.
- Call `collection.insertOne(,...)` (*without* a session argument)
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener contained a session `lsid`.

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

### 5. Session argument is for the right client

- Create `client1` and `client2`
- Get `database` from `client1`
- Get `collection` from `database`
- Start `session` from `client2`
- Call `collection.insertOne(session,...)`
- Assert that an error was reported because `session` was not started from `client1`

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

### 6. No further operations can be performed using a session after `endSession` has been called

- Start a `session`
- End the `session`
- Call `collection.InsertOne(session, ...)`
- Assert that the proper error was reported

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

If your driver implements a platform dependent idiomatic disposal pattern, test that also (if the idiomatic disposal
pattern calls `endSession` it would be sufficient to only test the disposal pattern since that ends up calling
`endSession`).

### 7. Authenticating as multiple users suppresses implicit sessions

Skip this test if your driver does not allow simultaneous authentication with multiple users.

- Authenticate as two users
- Call `findOne` with no explicit session
- Capture the command sent to the server
- Assert that the command sent to the server does not have an `lsid` field

### 8. Client-side cursor that exhausts the results on the initial query immediately returns the implicit session to the pool

- Insert two documents into a collection
- Execute a find operation on the collection and iterate past the first document
- Assert that the implicit session is returned to the pool. This can be done in several ways:
    - Track in-use count in the server session pool and assert that the count has dropped to zero
    - Track the lsid used for the find operation (e.g. with APM) and then do another operation and assert that the same
        lsid is used as for the find operation.

### 9. Client-side cursor that exhausts the results after a `getMore` immediately returns the implicit session to the pool

- Insert five documents into a collection
- Execute a find operation on the collection with batch size of 3
- Iterate past the first four documents, forcing the final `getMore` operation
- Assert that the implicit session is returned to the pool prior to iterating past the last document

### 10. No remaining sessions are checked out after each functional test

At the end of every individual functional test of the driver, there SHOULD be an assertion that there are no remaining
sessions checked out from the pool. This may require changes to existing tests to ensure that they close any explicit
client sessions and any unexhausted cursors.

### 11. For every combination of topology and readPreference, ensure that `find` and `getMore` both send the same session id

- Insert three documents into a collection
- Execute a `find` operation on the collection with a batch size of 2
- Assert that the server receives a non-zero lsid
- Iterate through enough documents (3) to force a `getMore`
- Assert that the server receives a non-zero lsid equal to the lsid that `find` sent.

### 12. Session pool can be cleared after forking without calling `endSession`

Skip this test if your driver does not allow forking.

- Create ClientSession
- Record its lsid
- Delete it (so the lsid is pushed into the pool)
- Fork
- In the parent, create a ClientSession and assert its lsid is the same.
- In the child, create a ClientSession and assert its lsid is different.

### 13. Existing sessions are not checked into a cleared pool after forking

Skip this test if your driver does not allow forking.

- Create ClientSession
- Record its lsid
- Fork
- In the parent, return the ClientSession to the pool, create a new ClientSession, and assert its lsid is the same.
- In the child, return the ClientSession to the pool, create a new ClientSession, and assert its lsid is different.

### 14. Implicit sessions only allocate their server session after a successful connection checkout

- Create a MongoClient with the following options: `maxPoolSize=1` and `retryWrites=true`. If testing against a sharded
    deployment, the test runner MUST ensure that the MongoClient connects to only a single mongos host.
- Attach a command started listener that collects each command's lsid
- Initiate the following concurrent operations
    - `insertOne({ }),`
    - `deleteOne({ }),`
    - `updateOne({ }, { $set: { a: 1 } }),`
    - `bulkWrite([{ updateOne: { filter: { }, update: { $set: { a: 1 } } } }]),`
    - `findOneAndDelete({ }),`
    - `findOneAndUpdate({ }, { $set: { a: 1 } }),`
    - `findOneAndReplace({ }, { a: 1 }),`
    - `find().toArray()`
- Wait for all operations to complete successfully
- Assert the following across at least 5 retries of the above test:
    - Drivers MUST assert that exactly one session is used for all operations at least once across the retries of this
        test.
    - Note that it's possible, although rare, for >1 server session to be used because the session is not released until
        after the connection is checked in.
    - Drivers MUST assert that the number of allocated sessions is strictly less than the number of concurrent operations
        in every retry of this test. In this instance it would be less than (but NOT equal to) 8.

### 15. `lsid` is added inside `$query` when using OP_QUERY

This test only applies to drivers that have not implemented OP_MSG and still use OP_QUERY.

- For a command to a mongos that includes a readPreference, verify that the `lsid` on query commands is added inside the
    `$query` field, and NOT as a top-level field.

### 16. Authenticating as a second user after starting a session results in a server error

This test only applies to drivers that allow authentication to be changed on the fly.

- Authenticate as the first user
- Start a session by calling `startSession`
- Authenticate as a second user
- Call `findOne` using the session as an explicit session
- Assert that the driver returned an error because multiple users are authenticated

### 17. Driver verifies that the session is owned by the current user

This test only applies to drivers that allow authentication to be changed on the fly.

- Authenticate as user A
- Start a session by calling `startSession`
- Logout user A
- Authenticate as user B
- Call `findOne` using the session as an explicit session
- Assert that the driver returned an error because the session is owned by a different user

### 18. Implicit session is ignored if connection does not support sessions

Refer to [Testing against servers that do not support sessions](#testing-against-servers-that-do-not-support-sessions)
and configure a `MongoClient` with command monitoring enabled.

- Send a read command to the server (e.g., `findOne`), ignoring any errors from the server response
- Check the corresponding `commandStarted` event: verify that `lsid` is not set
- Send a write command to the server (e.g., `insertOne`), ignoring any errors from the server response
- Check the corresponding `commandStarted` event: verify that lsid is not set

### 19. Explicit session raises an error if connection does not support sessions

Refer to [Testing against servers that do not support sessions](#testing-against-servers-that-do-not-support-sessions)
and configure a `MongoClient` with default options.

- Create a new explicit session by calling `startSession` (this MUST NOT error)
- Attempt to send a read command to the server (e.g., `findOne`) with the explicit session passed in
- Assert that a client-side error is generated indicating that sessions are not supported
- Attempt to send a write command to the server (e.g., `insertOne`) with the explicit session passed in
- Assert that a client-side error is generated indicating that sessions are not supported

### 20. Drivers do not gossip `$clusterTime` on SDAM commands.

- Skip this test when connected to a deployment that does not support cluster times
- Create a client, C1, directly connected to a writable server and a small heartbeatFrequencyMS
    - `c1 = MongoClient(directConnection=True, heartbeatFrequencyMS=10)`
- Run a ping command using C1 and record the `$clusterTime` in the response, as `clusterTime`.
    - `clusterTime = c1.admin.command({"ping": 1})["$clusterTime"]`
- Using a separate client, C2, run an insert to advance the cluster time
    - `c2.test.test.insert_one({"advance": "$clusterTime"})`
- Next, wait until the client C1 processes the next pair of SDAM heartbeat started + succeeded events.
    - If possible, assert the SDAM heartbeats do not send `$clusterTime`
- Run a ping command using C1 and assert that `$clusterTime` sent is the same as the `clusterTime` recorded earlier.
    This assertion proves that C1's `$clusterTime` was not advanced by gossiping through SDAM.

## Changelog

- 2025-02-24: Test drivers do not gossip $clusterTime on SDAM.
- 2024-05-08: Migrated from reStructuredText to Markdown.
- 2019-05-15: Initial version.
- 2021-06-15: Added snapshot-session tests. Introduced legacy and unified folders.
- 2021-07-30: Use numbering for prose test
- 2022-02-11: Convert legacy tests to unified format
- 2022-06-13: Relocate prose test from spec document and apply new ordering
- 2023-02-24: Fix formatting and add new prose tests 18 and 19

Commit message:

RUST-2279 Add `snapshot_time` option for snapshot sessions (#1555)

spec/sessions/README.md, after:

# Driver Session Tests

______________________________________________________________________

## Introduction

The YAML and JSON files in this directory are platform-independent tests meant to exercise a driver's implementation of
sessions. These tests utilize the [Unified Test Format](../../unified-test-format/unified-test-format.md).

### Snapshot session tests

The default snapshot history window on the server is 5 minutes. Running the test in debug mode, or in any other slow
configuration may lead to `SnapshotTooOld` errors. Drivers can work around this issue by increasing the server's
`minSnapshotHistoryWindowInSeconds` parameter, for example:

```python
client.admin.command('setParameter', 1, minSnapshotHistoryWindowInSeconds=600)
```

### Testing against servers that do not support sessions

Since all regular 3.6+ servers support sessions, the prose tests which test for session non-support SHOULD use a
mongocryptd server as the test server (available with server versions 4.2+); however, if future versions of mongocryptd
support sessions or if mongocryptd is not a viable option for the driver implementing these tests, another server MAY be
substituted as long as it does not return a non-null value for `logicalSessionTimeoutMinutes`; in the event that no such
server is readily available, a mock server may be used as a last resort.

As part of the test setup for these cases, create a `MongoClient` pointed at the test server with the options specified
in the test case and verify that the test server does NOT define a value for `logicalSessionTimeoutMinutes` by sending a
hello command and checking the response.

## Specific operations and behaviour for unified tests

An operation on sessions called `getSnapshotTime` must be supported for unified tests. This operation returns the value
of `snapshotTime` on the session, so that it can be used in subsequent operations.

When parsing `snapshotTime` from `sessionOptions` for unified tests, the parsed string is the name of the key for the
actual value of `snapshotTime` to be found in the
[entity map](https://github.com/mongodb/specifications/blob/master/source/unified-test-format/unified-test-format.md#entity-map).

## Prose tests

### 1. Setting both `snapshot` and `causalConsistency` to true is not allowed

Snapshot sessions tests require server of version 5.0 or higher and replica set or a sharded cluster deployment.

- `client.startSession(snapshot = true, causalConsistency = true)`
- Assert that an error was raised by driver

### 2. Pool is LIFO

This test applies to drivers with session pools.

- Call `MongoClient.startSession` twice to create two sessions, let us call them `A` and `B`.
- Call `A.endSession`, then `B.endSession`.
- Call `MongoClient.startSession`: the resulting session must have the same session ID as `B`.
- Call `MongoClient.startSession` again: the resulting session must have the same session ID as `A`.

### 3. `$clusterTime` in commands

- Register a command-started and a command-succeeded APM listener. If the driver has no APM support, inspect
    commands/replies in another idiomatic way, such as monkey-patching or a mock server.
- Send a `ping` command to the server with the generic `runCommand` method.
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener includes `$clusterTime` if and only if `maxWireVersion`
    > = 6.
- Record the `$clusterTime`, if any, in the reply passed to the command-succeeded APM listener.
- Send another `ping` command.
- Assert that `$clusterTime` in the command passed to the command-started listener, if any, equals the `$clusterTime` in
    the previous server reply.

Repeat the above for:

- An aggregate command from the `aggregate` helper method
- A find command from the `find` helper method
- An insert command from the `insert_one` helper method

### 4. Explicit and implicit session arguments

- Register a command-started APM listener. If the driver has no APM support, inspect commands in another idiomatic way,
    such as monkey-patching or a mock server.
- Create `client1`
- Get `database` from `client1`
- Get `collection` from `database`
- Start `session` from `client1`
- Call `collection.insertOne(session,...)`
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener contained the session `lsid` from `session`.
- Call `collection.insertOne(,...)` (*without* a session argument)
- Assert that the command passed to the command-started listener contained a session `lsid`.

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

### 5. Session argument is for the right client

- Create `client1` and `client2`
- Get `database` from `client1`
- Get `collection` from `database`
- Start `session` from `client2`
- Call `collection.insertOne(session,...)`
- Assert that an error was reported because `session` was not started from `client1`

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

### 6. No further operations can be performed using a session after `endSession` has been called

- Start a `session`
- End the `session`
- Call `collection.InsertOne(session, ...)`
- Assert that the proper error was reported

Repeat the above for all methods that take a session parameter.

If your driver implements a platform dependent idiomatic disposal pattern, test that also (if the idiomatic disposal
pattern calls `endSession` it would be sufficient to only test the disposal pattern since that ends up calling
`endSession`).

### 7. Authenticating as multiple users suppresses implicit sessions

Skip this test if your driver does not allow simultaneous authentication with multiple users.

- Authenticate as two users
- Call `findOne` with no explicit session
- Capture the command sent to the server
- Assert that the command sent to the server does not have an `lsid` field

### 8. Client-side cursor that exhausts the results on the initial query immediately returns the implicit session to the pool

- Insert two documents into a collection
- Execute a find operation on the collection and iterate past the first document
- Assert that the implicit session is returned to the pool. This can be done in several ways:
    - Track in-use count in the server session pool and assert that the count has dropped to zero
    - Track the lsid used for the find operation (e.g. with APM) and then do another operation and assert that the same
        lsid is used as for the find operation.

### 9. Client-side cursor that exhausts the results after a `getMore` immediately returns the implicit session to the pool

- Insert five documents into a collection
- Execute a find operation on the collection with batch size of 3
- Iterate past the first four documents, forcing the final `getMore` operation
- Assert that the implicit session is returned to the pool prior to iterating past the last document

### 10. No remaining sessions are checked out after each functional test

At the end of every individual functional test of the driver, there SHOULD be an assertion that there are no remaining
sessions checked out from the pool. This may require changes to existing tests to ensure that they close any explicit
client sessions and any unexhausted cursors.

### 11. For every combination of topology and readPreference, ensure that `find` and `getMore` both send the same session id

- Insert three documents into a collection
- Execute a `find` operation on the collection with a batch size of 2
- Assert that the server receives a non-zero lsid
- Iterate through enough documents (3) to force a `getMore`
- Assert that the server receives a non-zero lsid equal to the lsid that `find` sent.

### 12. Session pool can be cleared after forking without calling `endSession`

Skip this test if your driver does not allow forking.

- Create ClientSession
- Record its lsid
- Delete it (so the lsid is pushed into the pool)
- Fork
- In the parent, create a ClientSession and assert its lsid is the same.
- In the child, create a ClientSession and assert its lsid is different.

### 13. Existing sessions are not checked into a cleared pool after forking

Skip this test if your driver does not allow forking.

- Create ClientSession
- Record its lsid
- Fork
- In the parent, return the ClientSession to the pool, create a new ClientSession, and assert its lsid is the same.
- In the child, return the ClientSession to the pool, create a new ClientSession, and assert its lsid is different.

### 14. Implicit sessions only allocate their server session after a successful connection checkout

- Create a MongoClient with the following options: `maxPoolSize=1` and `retryWrites=true`. If testing against a sharded
    deployment, the test runner MUST ensure that the MongoClient connects to only a single mongos host.
- Attach a command started listener that collects each command's lsid
- Initiate the following concurrent operations
    - `insertOne({ }),`
    - `deleteOne({ }),`
    - `updateOne({ }, { $set: { a: 1 } }),`
    - `bulkWrite([{ updateOne: { filter: { }, update: { $set: { a: 1 } } } }]),`
    - `findOneAndDelete({ }),`
    - `findOneAndUpdate({ }, { $set: { a: 1 } }),`
    - `findOneAndReplace({ }, { a: 1 }),`
    - `find().toArray()`
- Wait for all operations to complete successfully
- Assert the following across at least 5 retries of the above test:
    - Drivers MUST assert that exactly one session is used for all operations at least once across the retries of this
        test.
    - Note that it's possible, although rare, for >1 server session to be used because the session is not released until
        after the connection is checked in.
    - Drivers MUST assert that the number of allocated sessions is strictly less than the number of concurrent operations
        in every retry of this test. In this instance it would be less than (but NOT equal to) 8.

### 15. `lsid` is added inside `$query` when using OP_QUERY

This test only applies to drivers that have not implemented OP_MSG and still use OP_QUERY.

- For a command to a mongos that includes a readPreference, verify that the `lsid` on query commands is added inside the
    `$query` field, and NOT as a top-level field.

### 16. Authenticating as a second user after starting a session results in a server error

This test only applies to drivers that allow authentication to be changed on the fly.

- Authenticate as the first user
- Start a session by calling `startSession`
- Authenticate as a second user
- Call `findOne` using the session as an explicit session
- Assert that the driver returned an error because multiple users are authenticated

### 17. Driver verifies that the session is owned by the current user

This test only applies to drivers that allow authentication to be changed on the fly.

- Authenticate as user A
- Start a session by calling `startSession`
- Logout user A
- Authenticate as user B
- Call `findOne` using the session as an explicit session
- Assert that the driver returned an error because the session is owned by a different user

### 18. Implicit session is ignored if connection does not support sessions

Refer to [Testing against servers that do not support sessions](#testing-against-servers-that-do-not-support-sessions)
and configure a `MongoClient` with command monitoring enabled.

- Send a read command to the server (e.g., `findOne`), ignoring any errors from the server response
- Check the corresponding `commandStarted` event: verify that `lsid` is not set
- Send a write command to the server (e.g., `insertOne`), ignoring any errors from the server response
- Check the corresponding `commandStarted` event: verify that lsid is not set

### 19. Explicit session raises an error if connection does not support sessions

Refer to [Testing against servers that do not support sessions](#testing-against-servers-that-do-not-support-sessions)
and configure a `MongoClient` with default options.

- Create a new explicit session by calling `startSession` (this MUST NOT error)
- Attempt to send a read command to the server (e.g., `findOne`) with the explicit session passed in
- Assert that a client-side error is generated indicating that sessions are not supported
- Attempt to send a write command to the server (e.g., `insertOne`) with the explicit session passed in
- Assert that a client-side error is generated indicating that sessions are not supported

### 20. Drivers do not gossip `$clusterTime` on SDAM commands.

- Skip this test when connected to a deployment that does not support cluster times
- Create a client, C1, directly connected to a writable server and a small heartbeatFrequencyMS
    - `c1 = MongoClient(directConnection=True, heartbeatFrequencyMS=10)`
- Run a ping command using C1 and record the `$clusterTime` in the response, as `clusterTime`.
    - `clusterTime = c1.admin.command({"ping": 1})["$clusterTime"]`
- Using a separate client, C2, run an insert to advance the cluster time
    - `c2.test.test.insert_one({"advance": "$clusterTime"})`
- Next, wait until the client C1 processes the next pair of SDAM heartbeat started + succeeded events.
    - If possible, assert the SDAM heartbeats do not send `$clusterTime`
- Run a ping command using C1 and assert that `$clusterTime` sent is the same as the `clusterTime` recorded earlier.
    This assertion proves that C1's `$clusterTime` was not advanced by gossiping through SDAM.

### 21. Having `snapshotTime` set and `snapshot` set to false is not allowed

Snapshot sessions tests require server of version 5.0 or higher and replica set or a sharded cluster deployment.

- Start a session by calling `startSession` with `snapshot = false` and `snapshotTime = new Timestamp(1)`.
- Assert that a client side error was raised.

### 22. Retrieving `snapshotTime` on a non-snapshot session raises an error

Snapshot sessions tests require server of version 5.0 or higher and replica set or a sharded cluster deployment.

- Start a session by calling `startSession` on with `snapshot = false`.
- Try to access the session's snapshot time.
- Assert that a client side error was raised.

## Changelog

- 2025-09-25: Added tests for snapshotTime.
- 2025-02-24: Test drivers do not gossip $clusterTime on SDAM.
- 2024-05-08: Migrated from reStructuredText to Markdown.
- 2019-05-15: Initial version.
- 2021-06-15: Added snapshot-session tests. Introduced legacy and unified folders.
- 2021-07-30: Use numbering for prose test
- 2022-02-11: Convert legacy tests to unified format
- 2022-06-13: Relocate prose test from spec document and apply new ordering
- 2023-02-24: Fix formatting and add new prose tests 18 and 19
